In mid 1800s England, Charles Babbage
and Ada Lovelace created the ideas behind
modern computing. Ada saw the start of frontier
of general purpose machines, automation
past a single task. This led to the rise
of early computing and helped engineers
see greater purpose in their machines.
The beginning of computing
normally starts in the 1640s
when Blaise Pascal built his calculator in
France. Tired of the intensive mental work
of doing taxes by hand, he created
a machine to automate the process.
It was a bit more than the abacus of his
time, but it was a calculator and could help with some basic algebra,
yet it was calculations were static and couldn't
adapt. The calculator must have worked well enough
as it was put through 50 revisions. This set
a bit of precedent when it came to automation:
automate tasks with a machine specialized
for that task and only that task. That's the obvious solution.
Jacquard furthered automation with Jacquard's
Loom in 1804. Joseph-Marie Jacquard
automated the production of the aristocracy's
favored patterned cloth. He made a customizable
machine, the pattern changed depending on what
holes had been punched into a wooden card.
It caused the cost of high quality cloth to
plummet. The industrial revolution was one outcome
of this invention. You could make thousands of
cloth with different patterns in a single day
with a single loom. Science and Industry Muesem
says "[Jacquard's Loom] made it possible for
complex and detailed patterns to be manufactured
by unskilled workers in a fraction of the time".
The machine was for a single task, it
adapted with no context of its own,
relying solely on the set of instructions given
to it for guidance. A simple dumb wood loom.
Ada Byron was born in 1815, later renamed
Ada King, Countess of Lovelace. Ada was
born the only legitimate child
of Lord Byron the *lordly* poet.
Due to her father's disposition, Ada's mother
tried to raise her as the opposite. Her childhood
tended to lean towards the sciences and by
the time she met Babbage, he described her as
"that Enchantress who has thrown her magical
spell around the most abstract of Sciences
and has grasped it with a force which few
masculine intellects could have exerted over it" .
Charles Babbage was an English mathematician
and engineer. Who spent a large part of his
life trying to build and obtain
funding for a Difference Engine.
It was designed to automate many
variations of the same equation,
something that only takes brute force to do.
It was still a very single-purpose machinelike its predecessors
but it started to lay the groundwork in
Babbage's mind for a greater machine.
Only bits of the Engine was built, you
could see how it could work. The government
and most people of the time didn't see
the benefit of an expensive calculator
when human labor could get the job done
for much cheaper.
The 1840s brought a new Engine designed by
Babbage; The Analytical Engine. Ever iterating
on the Difference Engine, he soon thought up
a way to forgo the limits of basic arithmetic
and instead be able to theoretically solve any
math problem, given you could lay out the steps to
solving the problem. It was so ahead of its time
The Computer Museum says "The logical structure
of the Analytical Engine was essentially the same
as that which has dominated computer design for the
electronic era". No previous work could even come
close to the engine, it was by itself part of a
frontier with no one in it. Yet the potential was
mostly unseen, "Surely if completed it would be
worthless as far as science is concerned?" states
Robert Peel the Prime Minister of England at the
time. Regardless a document was written up by the
future prime minister of Italy Luigi Menabrea in french.
This most would notsee issue with,
except the British who wanted to
see how Babbage improved upon his previous Engine.
Ada King Countess of Lovelace was qualified for
this job, she had the understanding of complex
math and French required for the job. This she
took a year to do. Lady Lovelace did with
high proficiency. Not only just translating the
original document, but including a large number of
notes. These notes were bigger than the original
document. She saw more from the Analytical Engine
than most people at the time, thinking it could
be used more generally. She claimed in note G,
that The Engine -and therefore all computers
that worked similarly as The Engine- could not
create ideas of its own. The Engine was only as
smart as its instructor, we'll come back to that.
Lovelace also attached a diagram that contained
an algorithm to calculate a set of numbers, to do
this she created her own system of writing down
programs, or what you need to tell the machinewhat
to do. A language for "programming" computers.
Some might consider this one of the first
programming languages, an idea that would
help later engineers map out their programs. She
saw potential in the machine past just math,
saying it could be used for composing music.
Unfortunately the Analytical Engine was never built.
It wasn't until Harvard Mark 1 in the 1930s,
spearheaded by Howard Aiken that Babbage's
ideas would start to be realized. Babbage's child
Henry Babbage sent Harvard the built parts of the
Difference Engine. As Aiken was looking through
the Harvard archives he found the received bits
from Henry. While not directly credited for the
Mk. I, nor was the designs in any way based on
the Engines, Babbage is said to be an interest of
Aiken. IBM claims "[The Mark 1] brought Babbage's
principles of the analytical engine almost to
full realization, while adding important new
features.". Its biggest achievement was bringing
these ideas to reality. A highly programmable
calculating engine controlled like its predecessor
through punch cards. Still, its focus was math.
The trend line was going up; computers could
do nothing (because they didn't exist). Then
it could, Hey! Actually, do something! It
wasn't quite expanding past math but it
was a starting point, and doing something
is more general than doing nothing.
Ada's programming notation from her original
translation was an idea that kept recurring.
People started writing down the instructions
they needed to punch, making their job of keeping
track of the program easier. This notation
started to become more and more necessary,
as in the 1940s two new computing machines were
built, The ENAIC and The Manchester Baby.
These machines started to become powerful enough
to run programs that run other programs.
You could write a program in one notation, and have the
machine create another program it could run moreeasily.
People were starting of thinking of doing
more with their computers. New notations would
allow programmers to create notations that allowed
them to create more complex programs as well as
condense the space needed to store programs. This
was also an expansion of the previously theorized
sets of rules of Lambda Calculus by Alonzo
Church and Turing Machines by Alan Turing.
Finally, Alan Turing made a note in a 1950 paper
pertaining to artificial intelligence.
He sees a point Ada Lovelace makes in her
translation; Lovelace claims computers,
in the way she understood them, could
not create a new thoughts just based
on what it knew. Yet Turing saw more in the
cold electronics, saying "[if that is true then]
there is no virtue in the mere working out of
consequences from data and general principles.".
We can look at data and form conclusions, is
that not thinking? The computer should not be
limited to what the programmer was expecting
when writing a program nor when running a
program, but the knowledge of anything it has
access to or is able to deduce from other information.
A machine that can be extended to the most niche
of use cases.
A truly general machine.